 
  
4.  SYLLABUS  
 
Foundation Medical Bio -Chemistry ( MBChB -ECP 1)                                   (MFBC010)      
 MFBC 010 is designed to give students a firm grounding in basic chemistry, with an emphasis on understanding 
bodily processes in humans which are of a chemical nature. The module has two secti ons, general chemistry and 
organic chemistry and biochemistry  
 General chemistry  
In general chemistry you are expected to understand the use of the SI system of measurement, Distinguish between and to compare elements, compounds and mixtures. Understand the importance and the use of the 
periodic table. Describe the types of radiation produced during radioactive decay. Explain the formation of ions 
and of ionic bonds. Name ionic compounds covalent bonding and name covalent compounds. Also included in the 
course content are chemical reactions, gases, solutions, acids and bases.  
 
Organic chemistry and Biochemistry  
Draw structures for and name various alkanes, alkenes and alkynes.  Indicate sources, properties and uses of 
hydrocarbons, alcohols, ethers, thiols , haloalkanes, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters, amides, amines.  
Classify carbohydrates, Lipids and proteins. Properties of carbohydrates, Lipids and proteins  
  
Assessment:  four Semester tests (1 and 1/2 hour) and 1 x 3 -hours written paper fin al examination  
 
Biophysics and Numeracy  (MBChB -ECP 1)       (MFBP 010)  
 This modules consists of two sections namely Numeracy and Biophysics.  
 
Numeracy
  
Numeracy is intended to equip you basic skills of manipulating fractions, exponentials, logarithms, Py thagoras 
theorem and basic trigonometry. You will also learn how to collect, analyze and interpret data. Data gives rise to 
information. Information can only be understood through interpretation using statistical parameters hence the 
focus on equipping you with basic statistical skills which will constitute a foundation for your future studies. The 
course content includes: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of fractions, laws of exponentials and logarithms, Pythagoras theorem and simple trig onometrical ratios, forms of data (nominal, ordinal; interval and 
ratio), frequency tables, graphs and charts, rates and proportions, measures of central tendency, measures of dispersion and analysis of errors.  
 
Biophysics  
 Biophysics is a practical physics course in which you will learn about the interaction of physics and the human body through a series of lectures and experimental activities. Emphasis will be on developing physics problem 
solving skills through a series of graded tutorial questions, prac tical sessions and lectures. The course content 
includes; motion; force and motion; work and power; elastic properties of materials; heat; liquids/fluids; static 
electricity; direct currents; electromagnetism; induced currents; waves; sound; light; mirrors  and lenses; nuclear 
physics; ionising radiation. The teaching program comprises one formal lecture per week (40 minutes) and one 
tutorial session (80 minutes) and a 2 hour practical session a week.  
 Assessment:  four Semester teats (each 1 hour) and 1 x 3 -hours written paper final examination  
 
Foundation English for Medicine   (MBChB -ECP 1)   (MFEN 010)  
 
Medical Foundation English for Medicine MFEN010 is one of six compulsory courses for MBChB ECP I first 
entering students.  This course is aimed at equipp ing students with academic writing skills and tools to help them 
cope with the demands of discipline specific writing genres at tertiary level, for example to write formally, with 
precision and objectively.  
  
 In terms of structure, there are 3 contact sessi ons per week, amounting to approximately three -and-a-half hours 
weekly.  In addition, there are 4 formal tests scheduled for the year.  Two of these tests are written in the first 
semester, and two in the second semester.  Students are also subjected to wr iting informal class tests (on an 
ongoing basis throughout the year) these are usually peer -marked.  Standard examinations commences in 
October of every academic year.  
 With regard to prescribed material, The Oxford Advances Learner’s Dictionary  is a compu lsory prescribed book.  
In addition, a newly designed English Reader  has been compiled in 2018.  This Reader  leans towards a student -
centred approach to teaching.  Furthermore, it focusses on developing academic writing and communicative 
competence.  The R eader  is divided into units which cover topics such as: brainstorming & mind -mapping; topic 
sentences; paragraph writing; academic writing; comprehension skills; language conventions; reading and 
dictionary skills.  
 This is an informative, interesting and enjoyable course.  
 
Foundation Introduction to the Human Body (MBChB -ECP 1)  (MFHB010)  
  
 Foundation Medical Biology (MBChB -ECP 1)  MFMB010   
 The Foundation Medical Biology (MBChB -ECP 1) syllabus is designed to provide broad competence for careers 
that inv olve the biology of animals, plants in relation to their environment including human medicine.  
 
Module content: The module will introduce the student to the field of Microbiology, Taxonomy, Genetics, Ecology, 
Diabetes, Environmental science and Anatomy.  
 
Basic Microbiological aspects that will be covered include introduction into the diversity of the microbial world 
(bacteria, archaea, eukaryotic microorganisms and viruses), basic principles of cell structure and function, 
microbial nutrition and microbial  growth and growth control. Applications in Microbiology will be illustrated by 
specific examples i.e. bioremediation, animal -microbial symbiosis, plant -microbial symbiosis and the use of 
microorganisms in industrial microbiology. Wastewater treatment, mic robial diseases and food will be introduced 
using specific examples.  
 
While Genetics will be covered include chromosomes and cell division. Principles of Mendelian inheritance: locus 
and alleles, dominance interactions and epistasis. Probability studies, s ex determination and sex linked traits, 
pedigree analysis, extra nuclear inheritance, genetic linkage, chromosome mapping and chromosome variation will also be covered. Basic human reproductive organs aspects will include reproductive health and human 
welfare, implantation and placental physiology in pregnancy, placental secretions and their regulation.  Basic 
understanding of diabetes pathophysiology, diabetes biology, diabetes prevention and diabetes therapy will be covered. Discussion about various psycho social aspects of type 1 and type 2 diabetes will be done.  
 
Moreover, understanding of relationships between different organisms to one another and to their physical surroundings will be covered under Ecology. Environmental science that will be covered inc lude public awareness 
of environment issues, role of Government, NGO’s, environmental movements, natural resources, effect of human activities, depletion of resources, generation of waste, threats to biodiversity, extinction of species and sustainable 
deve lopment.  Understand the scientific study of the physiology, structure, distribution, classification, and 
importance of plants will also be covered.  
 
Lastly, this module will cover process of science which consists of scientific method where by the collect ion of 
data through observation and experimentation, and the formulation and testing of hypotheses will be done.  
 The teaching program comprises of one formal lecture per week (40 minutes) and one tutorial session (80 
minutes) and 2 hour practical session  a week.  
 
Assessment: Four formative assessment semester (tests) (1hr: 30 mins); one practical assessment (1 hour) and 1 
x 3-hours written paper summative assessment (final examination). Admission to write the summative 
assessment depends on compliance wi th General rule 13.1.   
  
Medical Foundation of Study Skills (MBChB -ECP 1)   MFSS010      
 
Foundation Study Skills and Computer Literacy (MFSS010) guides and prepares student in their studies. It does 
that by equipping students with skills that will help them  to succeed in their studies. It will also help them to 
respond positively to the demands of studies and university life.  
  
The core purpose of this module is to produce qualifying learners who will demonstrate ethical and \ professional 
conduct in their un iversity studies and in their lives in general. They will gain self -knowledge and determine 
their own suitability to cope with a career in a new environment; develop appropriate thinking strategies; 
determine strategies to adjust to new environments and su itable study strategies.  
 
MFSS010 allows for an integrated approach to learning, teaching and assessment, in that the issues dealt with in the different Learning Outcomes can be integrated.  
Assessment  
 Students need to obtain 40% in the Continuous Assessme nt to be eligible to sit for the Final Assessment. If they 
fail to score 40% in the Continuous Assessment they will not be admitted to the Final Examination. Likewise, it is 
compulsory for students to score a minimum of 40% in the Final Examination and a c umulative (Continuous 
Assessment and Final Examination together) 50% to be promoted to the next year level –  in this case admission 
to MBChB ECP 2.  
 
 In other words, students will fail the module if they fail to obtain:  
 
 (a) 40% in the Continuous Assessme nt 
 (b) 40% in the Final Examination  
 (c) A cumulative mark of 50%.  
 
Advanced Microbiology (BSc Hons (MS)       (MMMB080)  
 This course is an extension of the basics in medical microbiology with an in depth focus on specific pathogenic 
organisms. Focus w ill be on the pathogenesis, laboratory investigation and prevention/vaccine development and 
antimicrobial resistance mechanisms.  
 
Assessment:  2 written papers, and an oral assessment with an external examiner  
 
Advanced Virology (BSc Hons (MS)       (MMVB08 0) 
 This course is an extension of the basics in medical microbiology with an in depth focus on specific pathogenic 
organisms. Consists of lectures, tutorials and student seminars, as well as assignments covering the study in 
relative detail of selected t opics in Medical Virology. Topics include viral replication, cell transformation & tumour 
viruses, viral evolution, immunology of infectious diseases pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and analysis, 
epidemiology, prevention and treatment), basic vaccinolog y and vaccine development, viral hepatitis, viral 
gastrointestinal diseases, HIV/AIDS and human papillomaviruses.  
 
Assessment:  2 written papers, and an oral assessment with an external examiner  
 
 
Anatomical Pathology  (MBChB III & BSc(Med) II)       (ANPA10 7) 
 
General Pathology  
Including cell damage; inflammation, healing and hypertrophy; the immune response; immunopathology; 
infections; host parasite relationships; disturbances of circulation. Miscellaneous degeneration and deposits; 
tumours; origin, natur e and causation; epithelial and other tumours.  
 
Systems Pathology   
 Cardiovascular system; respiratory system; nervous system; reproductive system, male and female; gastro -
intestinal system; liver biliary tract and exocrine pancreas; urinary system; musculo -skeletal system; skin; 
endocrine system; blood and bone marrow; lymphoreticular system.  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper, a practical and an oral  
 
Anatomy IC  (MBChB II)    (ANTM 208)  
   (MANA021/022)  
 
 Anatomy is offered as two year modules.   
MANA021 will i nclude Gross Morphology: Identify and describe the morphological anatomy as applied to each 
region in the human body in terms of the macro structure i.e. osteology, general structure (including organs), musculature, blood supply, venous and lymphatic drain age, nerve supply, joints and surface anatomy.  
MANA022 will include Histological Anatomy and Embryology as applied to Gross Morphology.  
 
Anatomy  (B Rad I)  (MANB010)  
 
This course is similar to that of Anatomy (Nursing).  It entails the teaching of system atic human anatomy and 
surface anatomy for all relevant structures with emphasis on those sections of specific radiological importance.   
This is done by means of problem –based lectures, traditional lectures, practicals, demonstrations and tutorials 
using human material as well as radiographic images.  Evaluation is done by means of written theory tests, 
practicals and assignments.   
The same exemption rule as for MBChB II is applied.    
 
Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written paper  
 
Anatomy (B Rad III)  (MPAA030)  
 
 
The course includes systematic anatomy as well as sectional anatomy.  Systematic anatomy focuses largely on 
neuro -anatomy, the respiratory and cardiovascular systems as well as the gastrointestinal, genito -urinary 
systems, with emphasis on radiological important structures.  Sectional anatomy focuses on relations of 
radiological important structures at various anatomically important levels of the human body and is accompanied 
by practical sessions with both CT/scan/rontgen images and sectional specimens . 
Teaching is largely based on problem based learning (PBL), but includes formal lectures, practical sessions, 
assignments and self -study. The same exemption rule as for MBChB II is applied.    
Assessment includes one 3 -hours paper and an oral Assessment/ OSCE  
 
Applied Medical Biochemistry  
 
Matter; energy changes; gases; electrolytes and minerals; symbols; reactions; water (pH, dissolution and reaction, osmosis and properties of liquids); energy (production in chemical reactions, conservation, heat product ion).  
Biochemistry (composition of carbohydrates, fats and proteins); nutrients (digestion and absorption); cellular metabolism; conservation; synthesis, transmutation and transportation of nutrients; excretion of waste products 
from the body; biochemical  control (enzymes, hormone); fluid balance (buffers, ion -exchange, gas exchange and 
selective excretion through kidneys, acids, bases, salts, estimation of levels and treatment of imbalance); 
electrolyte balance; neuro- muscular transmission (disturbances a t neuro -muscular level, transmission of impulses 
in miocardium); principles of drug action, periodic tables; elements; important compounds; detergents and disinfectants.   
 
Theoretical instruction: 60 x 40 -minute periods.   
Practical instruction: 30 period s 
 
 
  
 Biology I (BSc(Med) I; MBChB I)            (BLGY105)  
 
Introduction; evolution; taxonomy and systematics; cytology and genetics; tissues and systems; embryology; medically important parasites; medically important carriers; medically important poisonou s/venomous animals; 
medically important plants; ecology and environmental health.  
Practical.   
 
Assessment:  2 x 2 -hours written papers  
Total course Credits:  20 
 
Biology II  
 
Advanced cytology -  plant and animal cells, fine structure and function of cell o rganelles. Invertebrates; 
systematics and life cycle of selected groups with special reference to structure and function.  Botany; systematics and life cycle of selected groups; plant structure and function as well as plant physiology and reproduction.  Th e 
teaching programme comprises five formal lectures and two 3 -hour practicals per week.   
 Assessment: 1 written paper  
 
Biology III  
 
Vertebrates; systematics and life cycle of selected groups; fine structure and function; comparative morphology.  
Genetics  and reproduction.  Animal physiology; adaptations to various environments by both vertebrates and 
invertebrates.  General ecology.  Evolution.  The teaching programme comprises five formal lectures and two 3 -
hours practicals per week.   
 Assessment:  1 wri tten paper  
 
Biophysics IA (MBChB I)          (MBPC 010)  
 
 
Mechanics: Mathematical Concepts, Kinematics in 1 and 2 dimensions, Forces and Newton’s Laws, Dynamics of 
circular/rotational motions, Work and energy, Impulse and momentum.  
Fluids, Heat and Proper ties of matter: Elasticity, Fluids, Temperature and Heat, Transfer of Heat, Ideal gas law 
and Kinetic theory, Thermodynamics  
Waves, sound and optics: Waves and sound, Reflection of light, Refraction of light.  
Electricity and Magnetism: Electric Forces and Electric fields, Electric potential energy and Electric Potential, 
Electric Circuits, Magnetic Forces and Magnetic Fields, Electromagnetic induction.  
Modern Physics: Nuclear Physics and Radioactivity, Ionising Radiation.  
Introduction to Health Informatics:  Introduction to elementary statistics, Introduction to Computer Fundamentals.  
The teaching programme comprises of three formal lectures per week, one three hour practical and one three 
hour tutorial every alternating week.  
 
Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours writte n paper  
 
Biophysics IB - B Rad (Diagn) I          (MBPA010)  
 
 Mathematics review; vectors; kinematics; dynamics; hydrostatics; fluid flow; general gas law; heat; optics; 
electrostatics; current electricity; electro magnetism; alternating current; radioact ivity; x- rays.  The teaching 
program comprises five formal lectures per week and one 3 -hour practical every alternative week.   
 
Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written paper  
Total course Credits:  24  
  
 Biophysics IIB  (Equipment) B Rad(Diagn) II          (MBPA020)  
 
 
Review of electricity: current, voltage, resistance, DC, AC transformers, capacitor, mains voltage, three phase 
supply, power.  Basic electronics: diodes, transistors, SCR, operational amplifier, digital systems, and computer.  
X-ray equipment; mains s upply; x -ray tubes; x -ray tables and tubestands; high tension control circuits and 
stabilising equipment; transformers; exposure switching and exposure timers; circuit protection; meters; circuit 
diagrams; mobile portable and conventional dental units; con trol of scattered radiation; care and maintenance of 
equipment.  
 
Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written paper  
 
Biophysics IIC (Radiation Physics) B Rad (Diagn) II          (MBPB020)  
 
 Matter and energy; atomic structure; nuclear structure; radiation and spectra ; electromagnetic radiation; 
radioactivity; production of x -rays; interaction of x -rays with matter; effects of x -rays; measurement of x -ray 
quantity; dosimetry; filters and filtration; radiation quality; properties of x -ray film; radiographic image; radia tion 
protection.   
Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written paper  
 
Biophysics IIIB (Specialised equipment) B Rad (Diagn) III          (MBPA030)  
 
 Special x -ray tubes; mammography units; mass miniature radiographic units; video tape recording apparatus; 
photo and i onization timers; rapid sequence film changers and roll film apparatus; digital vascular imaging; 
tomographic equipment; computerisation of data; computer assisted tomography; magnetic resonance equipment; 
ultrasound; xerography; thermography; fluoroscopic  equipment; cine photofluorographic attachments.   
 Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written paper  
 
Biostatistics and Research Methodology  (Environmental Health)           (BIRM601)  
 
The collection, collation, depiction, analysis and interpretation of data pertain ing to health -related conditions.  
 
Chemical Pathology (MBChB IV)          (MCAA040)  
 
 
Introductory, including methodological and physiological interferences in laboratory tests.  The kidneys; sodium 
and water metabolism; potassium metabolism; hydrogen ion  homeostasis and blood gases; pituitary and gonads; 
hormones of the adrenal cortex; thyroid hormones; carbohydrates; plasma lipids; calcium; phosphorus and 
magnesium metabolism; intestinal absorption; gastric and pancreatic function; liver diseases and gal lstones; 
plasma proteins and immunoglobulins; proteinuria; plasma enzymes; cardiac biomarkers; inborn errors of 
metabolism; purine and uric acid metabolism; iron metabolism; porphyrins; vitamins; pregnancy and oral 
contraceptives; biochemical effects of tu mours; cerebrospinal fluid.  
 
Practical:  2 practicals  
Assessment:  1 written paper and an oral  
 
Chemistry IA ( MBChB I)         (MCHM010)  
 
Introduction to general chemistry; atoms, ions, and molecules; chemical laws; bonding; stoichiometry; the three 
states  of aggregation; solutions and mixtures; structure and reactivity; principles of equilibrium; free energy and 
spontaneity of reactions; electrochemistry; rates of reactions; radioactivity; stereoisomerism; systematic 
nomenclature of organic compounds accor ding to functional groups; reactions of classes of organic compounds; 
chemistry of physiologically important compounds.   
  
3 lectures and 1 practical per week  
Assessment:  1 x 3 hours written papers  
   
Clinical Pharmacology    (MBChB IV)       (MPYA040))  
 
 
Disease orientated, clinical pharmacology, based on prevalence of disease in the local and national communities 
(Pharmaco -epidemiology) .  Alternative and cost -effective medication.  Special precautions. Contents:  General 
aspects, drugs used for: infections , respiratory, cardiovascular, gastro -intestinal, genito -urinary, central nervous 
system, haematological, dermatological ophthalmological, otorhinolaryngological, endocrine, metabolic, immune 
system and Musculoskeletal disorders.  Drugs used for sexually t ransmitted diseases, parasitic infections and 
acute poisoning. Rational use of medicines. Evidence based Pharmacology.  
 Assessment:  Tests  
Assessment:  1 x 2 hours written paper and oral where applicable  
 
Clinical Psychology for MSc  
 
Advanced course in ps ychodiagnostics; medical and neuropsychology; psychopathology; personality theory; 
psychotherapy and development psychology.  Practical work as well as an internship at an institution recognised 
for this purpose by the Health Professions Council of South A frica.  
 
Communication Science: Capita selecta  (Environmental Health)  
 
Practical and theoretical training in communication skills in the private and public sectors at all levels of 
government or management.  Pedagogic skills.  Methods of Health Education.   
 A series of lectures as set out per topic below.   
Anatomical Pathology (40 lectures), Internal Medicine (40 lectures), Pharmacology (20 lectures.)  
 
Community Health (MBChB IV)         (MPBA040)  
 
 
Basic ecology, Basic biostatistics, demography and epid emiologic theory.  The epidemiology and intervention of 
the important health related conditions of Southern Africa.  Environmental health and occupational health.  The 
structure and functions of health delivery organisations in South Africa.  Basic health legislation.  Basic health 
management strategies.  Students may be required to perform their own approved study project.   
 
Assessment:  1 written paper  
 
Curriculum Design and Evaluation          (CDEV201)  
 Curriculum design levels in SA, The role of an e ducator in curriculum development, the process of curriculum 
development following the SAQA & NQF format; application of higher educational outcomes according to SAQA 
to programmes, elements for curriculum development, application of the major philosophies  underpinning OBE 
curriculum. Submission of curriculum to SANC.    
 
Curriculum implementation. Comprehensive curriculum and course/programme evaluation. Maintaining 
course/programme accreditation; role of providers, role of ETQAs. The responsibility of the educator with regard 
to curriculum review; the multicultural curriculum. Submission of qualifications to SAQA (format).  
 
 
 
 
  
 Dermatology         (DERM302)  
 
Introduction to the study of skin diseases; structure, function and physiology of the skin; skin d iseases which 
occur commonly or are otherwise of importance; contact dermatitis; industrial dermatoses and other cutaneous 
hazards; cutaneous malignancy.  
 
English for Health Science  (MEHS010)  
 
The MEHS010 course for first -year MBChB 1 and B Rad I is compr ised of the following components:  
• Life skills orientation  
• Library orientation  
• Computer literacy  
• Reading comprehension  
• Pearson Online (Self Study) –  this is a programme designed at developing reading and writing skills  
• Academic language conventions  
• Paragrap hing 
• Expository essay writing based on source material (skills developed here are paraphrase, summary, 
integration of sources, in -text and end -text referencing using a modified Harvard system)  
• Oral presentation using Power Point (based on expository essay work) – done in small groups  
• Medical terminology  
• Setswana for doctor -patient communication  
All of the above are assessed.  
Total course Credits B Rad 1:  12  
 
Environmental Health Management I and II  (Environmental Health)  
 
Technical principles to manage th e pollution of air, water and soil in the environment and to include all man's 
interrelationships with his environment as well as the problems of waste generated by production and consumption.  
 
Epidemiology  (Environmental Health)  
 Epidemiologic theory.  T he epidemiology and intervention of the important health -related conditions of Southern 
Africa.  
 
Family Medicine & Primary Health Care (Undergraduate training ) 
 
The course aims to give students an understanding of what Family Medicine and Primary Health C are is, 
including its development and the need for such a discipline; its principles and core content to give students the 
opportunity to put the above into practice and begin to learn the skills involved especially interviewing, clinical 
process and decis ion making.  The bulk of the teaching takes place as clinical tuition.  Ongoing evaluation takes 
place throughout the course.  The course is offered at MBChB I, II, III, IV and VI levels.  
 
Forensic Medicine (MBChB IV)  (MFPA040)  
 Signs of death, post morte m changes and time of death; identification of human remains; blood stains and 
grouping; types of wounds and injuries; fire arm wounds; injury by blunt instruments; effects of injury; asphyxia; 
suspicious neonatal death; abortion; sexual offences; the medi co legal autopsy; legal considerations.  Toxicology:  
General facts, Carbon Monoxide, Cyanide, Arsenic, Paraffin, Methyl Alcohol, Agricultural Poisons.   
 
Assessment:  1 written paper and an oral  
 
Health Administration: Capita selecta (BSc) (Med) (Hons) (En vironment 
Health)                        
 (HEAD601)  
  
 Leadership, policy -making, organisation, legislation, methods, control, financing and human resources 
management in comprehensive health services in Southern Africa.  
 
Human Anatomy IA          (ANTM109)  
 
The module provides an introduction to the anatomical structures of the human body including the following 
systems: mosculo -skeletal, respiratory, cardiovascular, neurological, digestive, endocrine, skin etc., for allied 
health professionals.  It will a lso include embryology and the sensory organs.  
 
Human Physiology ( MBChB II)  (MPIB021)  
 
Human physiology is offered as two year modules. Human Physiology (MPIB021 and MPIB022).  
 Human Physiology (MPIB021) will include:  
General knowledge of all systems in Physiology (including excitable tissue, the cardiovascular system, bold and 
Immunity, the gastrointestinal system, endocrinology, body temperature, reproduction, neurophysiology, special 
senses, respiration, renal physiology, body fluids, acid base) and physiological chemistry.  Physiology practicals 
on selected topics to illustrate the theory.  
 
Human Physiology (MPIB022) will include:  
Advanced knowledge of all physiological systems (including excitable tissues, the cardiovascular system, bold 
and immunity,  the gastrointestinal system, endocrinology, body temperature, reproduction, neurophysiology, 
special senses, respiration, renal physiology, body fluids, acid base) and physiological chemistry and application 
of this in clinical scenarios and the mechanism s involved in the development of pathological conditions  
 
Assessment:  2 written papers –  1 for each module  
 
Human Sciences (MBChB I)                                                                                             (MHUC010)  
                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
Foundations of Psychology, Learning Theories, Personality, Emotion, Motivation and Stress, Ps ychophysiology, 
Social Psychology, Interpersonal Skills  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper  
Total course Credits:   12 
 
Image Recording I (B Rad (Diagn) I)           (MIMR010)  
 
 
Principles of photography, image receptor systems, chemical processing of photographi c materials, radiographic 
image quality, identification and presentation, exposure charts  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper, a practical/ an oral/ OSCE  
 
Image Recording II (B Rad (Diagn) II)           (MRAA020)  
 
 Sensitometry, intesnsifying screens; computed r adiography; conventional fluoroscopy, daylight systems, 
specialised photographic procedures; radiographic image quality; exposure factors, silver recovery and 
conservation.  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper, a practical and an oral  
 
Image Recording III (B Rad (Diagn) III)           (MRAA030)  
 
  
 Computerized tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Direct Digital Radiography, Quality Assurance & 
Management in Radiography, Introduction to Ultrasound, Mammography & Bone Densitometry, Digital Fluoroscopy  
  Assessmen t: 1 written paper, practical and an oral  
 
Industrial Health Management I and II (BSc (Med) (Hons) (Environment Health))   
 Technical principles to manage the recognition, evaluation, prevention and control of industrial hazards, diseases 
and accidents.  Industrial relations and health.  
 
Internal Medicine (MBChB III, IV, V and VI)  
 
A practical course in Clinical Methods is introduced in the third year.  Whole class lectures are also introduced in 
the third year and continue through until the end of the fo urth year.   A course in the principles and practice of 
Medicine continues throughout the fourth and the fifth year during which students rotate through Medicine blocks.  
At the end of each practical block the students are assessed by means of a practical case Assessment.  At the 
end of the fifth year a final theoretical multiple choice and short question Assessment paper is set which included 
questions on Neurology.  
 
The sixth year is a practical year and the medicine block comprises an seven -week period.   Student interns in the 
sixth year are expected to be on call, clerk and follow up patients as part of their ward duties.  The final Assessments at the end of the sixth year consist of a clinical and an oral Assessment  
 
Media resource and Information Tech nology           (MRIT201)  
 Application of contemporary media resources and information technology within an educational context; Teaching 
aids.  
 
Medical Ethics  
 The course deals with the basis of ethics and how ethical behaviour is learnt.  The concepts  of the medical 
fraternity as an essentially self -regulatory body; etiquette and legal requirements for Doctors and Interns are 
discussed.  Daily ethical issues including, confidentiality, patient autonomy and consent; the Health Professions 
Council of Sou th Africa's Rules for disciplinary steps and major ethical problems such as those around 
conception, death and distributive justice are studied.  Some actual disciplinary past hearings of the HPCSA are 
discussed during the course.  
 
Medical Psychology (MBCh B III)          (MPSB030)  
 
 This course is given by the Department of Clinical Psychology and includes psychoneurology, doctor -patient 
relationship, pain, stress/anxiety/depression, disease of lifestyle, applications of clinical health psychology, 
aspects  of death and dying.  
 
Medical Microbiology (MBChB III)           (MMMA030)  
 
 
This course includes: Introduction to bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and pathogenesis of infections; Microbial 
genetics; Basic and clinical immunology; laboratory diagnosis;  infection prevention and control; clinical virology; 
antimicrobial agents and the following syndromes: Central nervous system infections; cardiovascular system 
infections; gastrointestinal tract infections; skin and soft tissue infections; genitourinary t ract infections, neonatal 
and childhood infections and zoonotic & vector borne (multisystem) infections.   
Assessment: Exam comprises of paper 1 and paper 2 (practical component) together with an oral for the 
borderline students.  
  
 Medicine’s Management          (PHMM601)  
 
Manage supply and use of medicines so that medicines are efficient, safe, suitable and available.  
 
Microbiology  Molecular Biology (BSc (Med) (Hons))  
 Molecular Biology; bacteriology; immunology; mycology; parasitology.  Practical work.   
 Assessment:  3 written papers and an oral Assessment  
 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology (MBChB III, IV, V and VI)  
 
The course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology covers the principles and practice of the discipline.   Instruction extends 
over the third, fourth, fifth and sixth years and includes lectures, demonstrations, case discussions,  tutorials and 
ward rounds.   Practical experience is gained in the block period in the fourth, fifth and sixth years.   Assessments 
are carried out at the end of each block.    
 The fina l written Assessment is held at the end of  the year for each class.   The final clinical Assessment takes 
place at the end of the year:  
(i)  Third Year -  POME III curriculum is done in Obstetrics only.  
 
(ii) Fourth Year -  Obstetrics  
        The syllabus consis ts of a series of  40 lectures covering reproduction genetics and obstetrics.   A practical 
block of  4 weeks. This block includes 40 labour wards, antenatal clinic and ward demonstrations and 
normal deliveries  2 class tests are written  per year with one in each half of the year (20% each).   An end 
of block assessment is conducted at the end of each block and accounts for 20%.   The continuous 
assessment counts for 60% of the assessment mark.   The final exam is written at the end of the year and 
accounts for 40 %.   
 (iii) Fifth Year -  Gynaecology  
 The syllabus consists of a series of  10 lectures.   A practical block of  5 weeks.   This block includes 18 
tutorials, appropriate ward rounds and clinical demonstrations. A class test is written on completion of 
the bloc k (counts 20%).   The second class test consist of MCQ and counts for 20%.   
 The end of block assessment  {clinical case done at the end of block) and accounts for  20% of the final 
mark and is made up as follows:    Continuous assessment accounts for 60%.At t he end of the year the 
written Assessments accounting for  40% of the  total mark will be held.   
  
(iv) Sixth Year -  Obstetrics and Gynaecology  
 The syllabus consists of a student internship of  7 weeks (3 1/2 weeks obstetrics and 3 1/2 
gynaecology).   Daily t utorial/seminar (Monday -  Friday) is held with assistance of private specialists.   
 Clinical duties in both obs and gynae are allocated to students  including calls.   Students are expected 
to present at labour ward rounds and at grand rounds to Consultants /Registrars.  
 
 All groups shall have EBA as full Assessment in the presence of external examiners; this EBA will 
comprise of clinical cases which counts 60%.     All students will have done OSCE  and Slide show with 
a minimum of 50% in each.   Students who pa ss EBA  with 60% will have passed O&G.   Students who 
fail EBA, OSCE and Slide show  will have full Assessment during mid -year exam or end of the year 
Assessment,  
 Note:   All groups before mid -year exams have a second opportunity.   All groups in second semest er 
have their second opportunity during the end of year Assessment.  
 All students failing mid -year or end of year Assessments will repeat the full block the following year.  
 
Paediatrics and Child Health (MBChB V and VI)  
 The syllabus for undergraduate pae diatrics extends from the 4
th to the 6th year.  Training consists of lectures on 
paediatric topics, whole class seminars, small group tutorials and clinical ward rounds.  MBChB IV students attend  
 30 morning sessions of clinical teaching.  Three weeks of th is time is devoted to Community Paediatrics.  The 
MBChB IV students perform the attachment to Paediatrics as part of POME IV.  
  
The MBChB V students attend seven weeks of teaching.  They also attend the Paediatric Outpatient Department 
to learn ambulatory  Paediatrics.  MBChB VI students spend a 7 week block period in the wards.  They rotate 
through general Paediatric medical wards, neonatology and a peripheral hospital.  The final Assessments in Paediatrics are taken at the end of the 5
th year (written) an d end of the 6th year (clinical Assessment).  
 
Pathology and Anatomy (B Rad III)          (MPAA030)  
 
 
Module I  - General Pathology  
Cell damage; inflammation; healing and hypertrophy; the immune response; immunopathology, disturbances of circulation.  Misce llaneous degeneration and deposits; tumours, origin, nature and causation; epithelial and other 
tumours.  Instruction: 32 x 40 -min periods.  
 
Module II  - Systemic Pathology  
Cardiovascular system; respiratory system; nervous system; reproductive system, male  and female; gastro -
intestinal system; liver biliary tract and exocrine pancreas; urinary system; musculo -skeletal system; endocrine 
system; blood and bone marrow; lymph reticular system.  
Instruction: 88 x 40 -min periods  
 
Module III  - Radiological Patholo gy 
Relevant pathological conditions and related anatomy as demonstrated radiographically are covered in this course.  Theoretical instruction is highlighted with the practical use of radiographic images to aid in the recognition 
of the pathological conditi ons in the different anatomical systems.  Instructions: 24 x 40- min periods.  
 
Module IV  - Cross -sectional Anatomy  
Cross -sectional anatomy of the head, trunk and limbs is covered in this course by means of formal lectures, 
practicals and demonstration using  human material as well as radiographic images.   Instruction: 36 x 40 -min 
periods  
Total instruction (Modules I -IV): minimum of 120 hrs.  
 
Assessment: 1 x 3 -hours paper and an oral/ Computer -based exam  
 
Personnel Management A & B (BSc) (Med) (Hons) (Enviro nmental Health)  
 A course over two years aimed at the management and administration of Environmental Health Services in the 
public and private sectors based on general principles.  
 
Pharmacology (Basic) (MBChB III)          (PHAR107)  
 
This introductory co urse in Pharmacology covers medicines (drugs) affecting various systems in the human body.  
The therapeutic and adverse effects of drugs on the following systems are included: autonomic nervous -, central 
nervous -, cardiovascular -, respiratory - and endocrin e system.  Chemotherapeutic drugs as well as the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of medicines are also included in the range of this course.  
Formal lectures: 4 lectures per week  
Assessment: 3 written tests and 1 written examination  
 
Physiology IB (B Rad II)          (MPLB020)  
 
 Basic principles of the following body systems: digestion and control of body temperature: nervous system, 
including nerve and muscle physiology and special senses, renal physiology, respiratory system; cardiovascular system:  endocrinology and reproduction.  Instruction:  Theoretical: 180 x 40 min periods  
  
 Assessment:  1 x 3 -hours written papers  
 
Pathology and Anatomy (B Rad III)          (MPAA030)  
 
 
Module I  - General Pathology  
Cell damage; inflammation; healing and hypertrop hy; the immune response; immunopathology, disturbances of 
circulation.  Miscellaneous degeneration and deposits; tumours, origin, nature and causation; epithelial and other 
tumours.  Instruction: 32 x 40 -min periods.  
 
Module II  - Systemic Pathology  
Cardiov ascular system; respiratory system; nervous system; reproductive system, male and female; gastro -
intestinal system; liver biliary tract and exocrine pancreas; urinary system; musculo -skeletal system; endocrine 
system; blood and bone marrow; lymphoreticular  system.  
Instruction: 88 x 40 -min periods  
 
Module III  - Radiological Pathology  
Relevant pathological conditions and related anatomy as demonstrated radiographically are covered in this 
course.  Theoretical instruction is highlighted with the practical use  of radiographic images to aid in the recognition 
of the pathological conditions in the different anatomical systems.  Instructions: 24 x 40 -min periods.  
 
Module IV  - Cross -sectional Anatomy  
Cross -sectional anatomy of the head, trunk and limbs is covered i n this course by means of formal lectures, 
practicals and demonstration using human material as well as radiographic images.   Instruction: 36 x 40 -min 
periods  
Total instruction (Modules I -IV): minimum of 120 hrs.  
 
Assessment: 1 x 3 -hours paper and an ora l 
 
Personnel Management A & B (BSc) (Med) (Hons) (Environmental Health)  
 A course over two years aimed at the management and administration of Environmental Health Services in the 
public and private sectors based on general principles.  
 
Pharmacology (Basi c) (MBChB III)          (PHAR107)  
 
This introductory course in Pharmacology covers medicines (drugs) affecting various systems in the human body.  
The therapeutic and adverse effects of drugs on the following systems are included: autonomic nervous -, cent ral 
nervous -, cardiovascular -, respiratory - and endocrine system.  Chemotherapeutic drugs as well as the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of medicines are also included in the range of this course.  
Formal lectures: 4 lectures per week  
Assessment: 3 w ritten tests and 1 written examination  
 
Physiology IB (B Rad II)          (MPLB020)  
 
 
Basic principles of the following body systems: digestion and control of body temperature: nervous system, 
including nerve and muscle physiology and special senses; body  fluid system, including renal physiology, 
haematology and acid -base balance; respiratory system; cardiovascular system: endocrinology and reproduction.  
Instruction:  Theoretical: 180 x 40 min periods; Practical: 45 periods (minimum 120 hours). If at the end of the year 
a student has written ALL the tests and has obtained at least 50% in each test, and an average mark of 60% or 
more in the tests, s/he may apply to the head of department to be exempted from the final Assessment in 
Physiology.  
 Assessment:  2 x 3 -hours written papers  
  
 Practice of Medicine I   (MPOM010)        
 
 
This course is offered at MBChB I level. The content includes introductory information about history of medicine, 
research principles, HIV/AIDS and counselling, hypertension, primary h ealth and emergency care, bioethics, vital 
signs, pollution, medical humanities, virology as well as rural community- based service learning and health 
promotion. Hypertension is a core disease which is offered as an integrated module. Students will obtain 
adequate insight into multi -disciplinary teamwork and will be able to explain the role of other health care 
professionals in order to provide holistic patient care. Students will obtain basic skills about wound care 
management, vital signs measurement  and performance of CPR.  
  
Practice of Medicine II          (MPOA020)  
                       
 
This course is offered at MBCHB II level and builds on the basis of first year. Students will have the opportunity to 
learn about Medical History taking, Principles of Bioethics and Integrated Management of Childhood illnesses. It 
will provide them with the opportunity to assess Environmental Health issues in the community and homes of patients and practice their skills in taking vital signs and observe for peripheral  signs. They will furthermore 
develop skills in evaluating medical research articles, including developing a basic understanding of biostatistics, 
qualitative and quantitative research. They will develop portfolios on patients who have anaemia and jaundice  
which are conditions for this year and are offered in an integrated manner. Integration also occurs among two other departments namely Anatomy and Physiology during clinical case discussions.  
 
Practice of Medicine III            (MPOA030)  
                     
 This course is offered at third year MBChB III level and will offer the students the opportunity to learn about the 
diagnostic process. They will get the chance to observe and participate in consultations with patients in primary 
healthcare clinics and get the opportunity to acquire the skills of clinical examinations; normal pregnant abdominal 
assessment & normal vertex delivery; and keeping medical records. Students will learn basic skills in communication in the care of a dying patient, as well as , history taking and basic clinical examination skills of 
patients with problems relating to cardiology, respiratory, gastroenterology, haematology, genetics, surgical 
conditions (such as neck mass, abdominal mass, leg swellings, breast lumps and trauma re lated cases). They will 
also acquire skills in searching the internet for best evidence and evaluating evidence. They will continue to build on learning portfolios on patients with diabetes mellitus and oedema.  
 
Practice of Medicine IV            (MPOA040)  
                        
 This course is offered at MBChB IV level and will offer the students the opportunity to rotate for 6 weeks in 
Medicine, Surgery (including Orthopaedics), Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics and Psychiatry.  There will be week ly lectures in Internal Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Psychiatry and other disciplines including Orthopaedics, Radiology, Nutrition and Family Medicine.  The focus will be on the identification of common clini cal signs and an understanding of the underlying pathophysiology.  
Portfolio learning will continue.  
 
Practice of Medicine V            (MPOA050)  
                       
 This course is offered at MBChB V level and will offer the students practical experience and theoretical 
understanding in Anaesthesiology, Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Orthopaedics.  Pathophysiology and 
Pathology within the wider context of integrated medicine will be offered as Case and Task based learning, 
focussing on the them es of Substance Abuse, Thyroid disease, Heartburn with Epigastric Pain and the Severely 
Traumatised Patient.  The student will be expected to continue with portfolio building.  
  
 Psychiatry  Courses (MBChB III, IV and VI)  
 
(i) MBChB III and IV  
 Medical psyc hology, offered in the MBChB III course by the Department of Clinical Psychology, serves 
as an introduction to Psychopathology, offered by the Department of Psychiatry, in the MBChB IV 
course.  These two courses include the following topics:  Personality st ress in health and 
illness; Psychosomatic disorders and pain; Clinical Psychology and Medicine ions  
 
(ii) MBChB V and VI  
 In the MBChB V and VI year courses the students do clinical psychiatry working in the wards and outpatient clinics. They also have te aching sessions in form of tutorials, and participate in case 
presentations. Attendance at all the activities is a prerequisite for the End of Block assessment. 
Evaluation is done in accordance with their case presentations, written examination and clinica l 
examination.  
 
Psychology and Mental Health Care  
 
Physiological basis of psychology: the human personality; motivation of conduct; frustration and conflict; defence mechanisms; emotion; attitudes; group morale, leadership; communication; human relations;  the child; the 
adolescent; the adult and the aged person as a patient.  Mental health care, psychosomatic and 
psychopathological conditions; broad concept of the management of patients with mental disturbances in 
hospitals and the community.  Theoretical instruction: 60 x 40 -minute periods.  
 
Human Science (MBChB)                           (MHUC01)  
 Introduction to Psychology: basic concepts, schools in Psychology and methodology.  The biological basis of 
behaviour.  Motivation, frustration and conflicts.  Developmental Psychology: infancy to old age.  Personality 
Psychology: basic constructs and selected topics.  Social, Psychology, Health, illness, disability and dying.   
 
Practicals   
Assessment:  1 written paper  
 
Radiation Techniques I (B Rad (Diagn) I)  (MRAT010)  
 
Patient and the radiographer, administration -hospital and department organisation, practical nursing procedures, 
first aid, general patient care, hygiene in X -ray department, sterilisation, drugs in the X -ray department.  Radiation 
hazard, fun damentals of diagnostic radiography, radiographic Assessments and techniques: skeletal system, 
abdomen, respiratory system, Introduction to radiation protection  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper and OSCE  
 
Radiation Techniques II (B Rad (Diagn) II)  (MRAB020)  
 Protection, radiographic Assessment of skeletal system, alimentary system; genito- urinary system;respiratory 
system, fluoroscopy;, foreign bodies,; contrast media, ethics and medical law, musculoskeletal radiography plus 
specialised projections and procedures.   
 Assessment:  1 written paper and OSCE  
 
Radiation Techniques III (B Rad (Diagn) III)  (MRAB030)  
 Computed Tomography Clinical applications, Biliary system; Genito -urinary system; Reproductive system, Cardio -
vascular system; lymphatic system; respir atory system; central nervous system; Athrography; Myelography; 
guided biopsies; Risk management, Ethics and Professionalism, Special contrast media in radiology; operating 
theatre procedures; ward radiography; paediatric radiography; soft tissue different iation; Ultrasound; Computed  
 Tomography; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Bone Densitometry, Introduction to Mammography, Dental 
radiography  
 
Assessment:  1 written paper and OSCE  
 
Undergraduate Research Project   (UGRP401)  
 
After completion of research design module I, students attend departmental research workshops conducted by 
the research coordinator on identifying a research topic as well as how to develop a research proposal. Each 
student shall select a research topic from the following fields of study: Re spiratory, Neurological Rehabilitation, 
Community and Orthopaedics. The topic gets peer reviewed and accepted by the department. The proposals will be submitted to the Research ethics committee (MREC) for approval by the University, students will be allowe d to 
execute their research projects thereafter.  
 Final evaluation:  Submission of two copies of a printed and one bound research report and oral presentation of the research findings.  
 
TOTAL COURSE CREDITS: 12 credits  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 